Dr. Thomas, would you tell us about some of the ways
that you have gone about raising money for
research endeavors?
Well, now you're talking just generally about
raising money for research, or are you talking
about specifically for the center here? For the
center here. For the center. Okay.
Well, the... The main objective when you have a new
organization such as this is and has been, you have
to establish your credibility. And you have to get
your name before those who sponsor work.
And we were
very fortunate in having early on a relationship
with Professor John Erickson of the University of
Edinburgh in Scotland, who is a, well, John is
probably one of the Western world's foremost
experts in the Soviet Union and Soviet military
history. And, well, he is a Kremlinologist, as
some of them are called. And so we were lucky in
hooking up with him very early. John's fame in the
U.S. and around the world brought us some degree of
notoriety rather early on. In essence, we rode
John's coattails into this new arena that Texas
A&M had decided to try to enter. And then, in
addition to that, it was a question of trying to
identify problems that were of national or
international interest and addressing those
problems and showing people that, in fact, we
could do work of this type. I think we've had some
success in that.
Of course, you have to understand that there is a
certain amount of huckstering to this whole
business.
One of the problems that you have with a young
professor, you say a young assistant professor
who has just gotten his PhD, and he comes to Texas
A&M, and he realizes that in order to get ahead
here, why, you've got to learn to bring in money.
What he doesn't realize is that the
business of bringing money does not depend
strictly on one's technical ability. A lot of
these young fellows think that in order to get
money that all they have to do is to write out a
proposal, a technically excellent proposal, and
send it off to the National Science Foundation or
NASA or DOD and say send money by return mail. Well,
it just doesn't happen that way. You have to sell
yourself. You have to convince the sponsor that
you're capable of doing good work and that you will
that you'll do some good for him. Chances are he's a
bureaucrat. He functions in that mode. He is
judged by his effectiveness and by the impact of
the money that he dispenses to others. Obviously,
if a guy sits up there and gives money to people who
don't perform, he's not going to have money to give
to them very long. So the business of raising
research is a combination of
competence and marketing and huckstering and so
forth. And some academicians recoil at that. They
think, well, it just ought to be Simon Pure. And you
ought to be judged strictly on your merits, your
technical merits. And I suppose that would be nice
if that's the way it was. But unfortunately,
that's not the way it is. So we, the past two years
then, I have spent an awful lot of time in
Washington and other places, and
just telling people about the Center, telling
them about Texas A&M, because, you know, this
Texas A&M has been, down over the years, a kind of a
parochial university. It, of course, being a
land-grant school, why it it felt responsive to
the needs of the state. And so as a result, it has not
been nationally involved for many years. And so
the center here sort of represents one of Texas
A&M's efforts to become nationally involved and
internationally involved.
But there was just an awful lot of people that had
seen Texas A&M's football team on the field and had
seen the Corps of Cadets and didn't really
understand that, you know. I should say the
marching band and the military aspects of the
university. But just surprising how many of those
folks needed to understand what Texas A&M was and
what it was like and the fact that it is not just
another pretty university. And so there's been a
lot of that, and essentially just the business of
establishing credibility and so forth. But it
has, oh, I'm pleased with what we've accomplished
to date, and I guess we'll get into that later, but
we've still got quite a ways to go. What are some of
the sources of funding that the research
department has brought here? Well,
the bulk of the funding from outside,
well, I guess we need to back up now a little bit. And
you need to understand the way the center has been
structured for most of its existence. That is
where we have had a series of groups within the
center.
Until
prior to the first of June of this year, we had the
Industrial Economics Group. It draws its funding
largely from cities and other entities around
over the state of Texas.
So the city of Del Rio, for example, or let's see, I
guess actually it was the COG, the Council of
Governments around Del Rio, hired the industrial
economics group back a year ago to do an industrial
base study. And that means they go in there and they
try to delineate all of the elements of the
economic base for that region of the state. And of
course, they were wondering what they could do to
broaden that. And they were wondering
specifically about how important an element of
tourism was and how to beef that up. And so our
people went in there and made the appropriate
surveys and recommendations and presented that
to the folks down there. So that funding came from
the four or five county region around Del Rio. And
they've done similar things for the city of Orange
and the city of Big Spring and so forth. And if you
interview John Roberts, who now heads the revised
industrial economics division, a separate
entity now, why he can tell you more about that.
Then we have an urban group, which essentially
tries to help city administrations around over
the state, trying to increase the efficiency of
the delivery of city government services to the
citizens.
Some of their funding comes from the cities. Some
of it came from the National Science Foundation,
which provided funding to set up something called
the Texas Innovation Group, which is a group of
around 40 cities that work together.
Then we had this education group, and the bulk of
their funding, their work deals largely with the
CETA program. And so they have what we call
pass-through money. It's federal money that
comes from the, I guess, from the Office of
Education, Department of Education, and comes to
the governor, and then from the governor to us. And
then we have a special studies group, and they were
involved in hurricane response modeling, trying
to, among other things, figure out how to evacuate
Galveston Island in the teeth of a large
hurricane. Now that money came partly from the
state and partly from NOAA. the National Office of
Atmospheric and National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. I'll get it right
here shortly. And also we have a man here who is an
expert in some of these exotic crops like Wai'uli
and jojoba. Waiuli is a little shrub that grows
wild in the Mexican desert and secretes latex. Can
you spell that? G-U-Y-U-L-E, Waiuli.
And we have a man here, Dan Bragg, who probably
knows more about the economics of Waiuli than
anybody else in the world. And there are those who
think that that we need to make way more of a cash
crop in the U.S. The Mexicans cultivated. They
have a processing plant at Sotillo in Mexico. Can
you spell that? Sotillo, S-A-L-T-I-L-L-O.
And
that money for Dan's work had come from the
National Science Foundation. And, let's see,
then in the defense group, which of course is the
sort of really the main reason that the center
exists. The bulk of that money comes from DOD. I
should say not the bulk of it, all of it comes from
DOD currently. And a large part of it from the
Office of Net Assessments,
which is part of the Office of Secretary of
Defense. And then we now have a program that is
being funded by the Defense Intelligence Agency.
That's DIA, not CIA.
And we've also done some work for the Foreign
Technology Division at Wright-Patterson, which
is the descendant of the old organization that I
worked for up there, the Air Technical
Intelligence Center. You mentioned earlier that
some of the research work that the center does is
unclassified
because of the military sensiveness of the- It's
classified because of the- Excuse me,
classified. I have the wrong word. Is any of this
information, can it be obtained through the
Freedom of Information Act? I don't know enough
about the legal ramifications of it. I would guess
not. I know that there's a controversy underway in
Congress now that a bill has been introduced to
exempt the CIA from this Freedom of Information
Act. Yes, uh-huh. Do you have any ideas on that?
Yeah, I'm afraid I'll reveal some biases here. Of
course, you know in the wake of Watergate and so
forth, there was a some dismantling of our
intelligence operations,
a move that I think has gone far too far.
And there was established this Freedom of
Information Act which guaranteed access to
certain classified or guarded material.
And, of course, it established several oversight
committees in Congress to look over the shoulder
of CIA. That, by and large, has been a disaster
because congressmen being the political
animals, and senators, I don't mean just
representatives, but being the political
animals they are, they just can't keep their
mouths shut.
And we have, I think we have severely damaged the
position and stature of the United States by
dismantling essential parts of our intelligence
apparatus and by permitting people to leak secret
material.
And it's been a sad operation. Now then, I would
have to say that there very likely were excesses,
abuses of that power that the CIA had and that the
so-called imperial presidency had,
but I worry less about that, frankly. I think I
would rather see perhaps some modest abuse of
power in contrast to a completely open situation.
I just don't agree that the press has a right to know
everything. And I think, you know, the pendulum
swings and we'll find the correct position here
eventually, but we're not there yet. Let me ask
you, do you know in numbers about how many other
universities have similar centers for strategic
technology that Texas A&M has? Or is this a rare
phenomenon, relatively rare? Well, it all
depends on how rigidly or broadly you define the
word similar. There are outfits that do Soviet
Warsaw Pact research work. At Harvard there is an
outfit called the Russian Research Center.
Probably one of the better known organizations is
the Hoover Institution, which is affiliated with
Stanford University. The Mershon Center at Ohio
State. Mershon, M-E-R-S-H-O-N Center at Ohio
State is pretty well known.
Center for Strategic Studies at Georgetown
University in Washington is very well known. And
there is a Center for International Studies, I
guess they call it, in Florida. I think it's at the
University of Florida at Gainesville, I believe,
but I'm not sure about that. And so, yes, there are
similar kinds of organizations that is similar in
terms of the type of work that they do. Now, our
philosophy, our operational philosophy,
however, is rather different than those. So this
is where I get in the business of being a little bit
more specific about the word similar.
One of the reasons that the Center exists is that we
had been encouraged by some fairly high-ranking
military officers to get into this game. And what
they were telling us was that some of the existing
think tanks, and there are those who refer to us as
the Aggie think tank, and I guess that's to some
extent true, but some of the existing, that most of
the existing think tanks had had gotten caught up
in the Washington scene. There are two large ones
which are not affiliated with universities, the
RAND Corporation, R-A-N-D, and of course, the
Brookings Institute in Washington. They've been
in this business a long time, as well as these other
university things. But what we were told was that
they have been in the business so long, and they
have become so much a part of the Washington scene
that they'd begun to feed on one another. And I know
from my experience when I was at the University of
Maryland and being in the Washington area that
these people all attend the same cocktail
parties. They attend the same briefings. And,
well, as a result, there's just no fresh thinking
that comes out of them. And so this was one of the
things that we were told very clearly, that the
nation needed a new boy on the block. to do some
fresh thinking, and somebody that was not a part of
the Washington scene. And we sure as the deuce
qualify on that basis.
Beyond that, one very high-ranking military
officer told me, he said, you know, Dick, he said,
he said our track record in terms of predicting and
evaluating Soviet actions and intentions has not
been good. And And one of the main reasons for that
is the so-called mirror image syndrome, which is a
view that the Soviet Union sees the world the way we
do, a view that believes that they respond to
pressures the way we would, that they want the same
things in the world that we do, and that's just flat
wrong. They think differently. They act
differently. They believe differently. And a lot
of our erroneous assessments of the USSR has
derived from that mirror image syndrome. And I had
had a brush with that when I was at ATIC way back
before I went back to do my graduate I can tell you
more about that. It involves some classified
stuff, but I can give you an unclassified
description of it. But from the beginning then, my
view has been that we were not going to fall into
that trap. That we were, to the extent that we
could, we were going to learn how to think Soviet.
In other words, when an issue or a problem came up,
we're going to try to try to think about it the way
the Soviets would. And this is a rather different
viewpoint than any of these other institutions
have. Yeah, I notice you have a Soviet map on the
wall behind you here, so that's to give you that
perspective. That's right. That's right. And
Professor Erickson at the University of
Edinburgh, who I mentioned earlier, has been very
important in this because course John you know
he's a brilliant man speaks six languages
including Russian fluently travels in Russia
extensively and his view is that it doesn't make
any difference whether you're talking about
Afghanistan or you're talking about space
warfare or you're talking about Poland or or what
that the in order to understand
the way the Russians operate, you have to
understand the Soviet psyche. And I regret to say
we have not spent a lot of time doing that. We spent a
lot of money studying the accuracy of their
missiles, and we can tell you how accurate they
are, and we can tell you how fast their airplanes
fly, and we can tell you how thick the armament is on
their, the armor plating is on their tanks, and so
forth. But when you come to study the Soviet
military man, the guy who pulls the trigger or
pushes the button or gives the order or the people
that back him up, we really don't understand a
great deal about the Soviet Union. And so that's
one of the underlying philosophies that we have
here, that we're going to make our studies, every
one that we do, just as broad as we possibly can. And
so one of the messages that I carried to people who
would sponsor our work was that philosophy. And I
had to tell them, if you give us money to study, say,
Soviet moves toward space warfare capability,
we're not going to limit it just to the
technological studies. We're going to try to
understand the people that make the decisions
that undergird that whole effort? And where are
the research institutes that supply that
technology? How do Brezhnev and the Politburo
feel about that? What sort of policy views do they
have? What are the decision-making processes
that underlie all of that? And so we tackle things
rather broadly here. uh then there was another
another element to this thing too i mentioned to
you that that there were some high-ranking people
and and also i i've talked about the military but
but we had well i have a former student who's on the
staff of the senate armed services committee he's
an a m graduate and of course he uh he works now for
senator tower and and uh And he has some very strong
views, and he's in a unique position to observe a
lot of this stuff. And from him and from others,
even military people, they
admitted that they had been part of the problem
here. That is to say that in the past, an outfit
would come to the military in Washington to get
money to do a piece of research work. And this, more
often than not, was not a university outfit. It
would be typically one of what we call the Beltway
Bandits, which is the array of little
organizations, R&D organizations, that dot the
Beltway around. What was that word? Beltway
Bandits, they called them. And they're outfits
who sell their services to the Pentagon and to
other agencies in Washington. Well, if one of
these outfits came to the Pentagon and got a chunk
of money,
in the process of negotiating the contract and
talking about the work, the Pentagon, the
military officers would tell the outfit, in
essence, what they thought the answer would be
when they completed this research. More often
than not, lo and behold, that was in fact the answer
that showed up.
And I don't know that there was anything
necessarily malicious about this. It was just
something that happened. And so there was a crying
need for objectivity in a lot of these studies. and
a crying need for an organization that would
simply call a spade a spade. And if you came up with
an answer that was somewhat different than what
the sponsor thought it was going to be, well,
that's the way it was. In short, it was hoped that we
could avoid a position where we might be judged to
be intellectual prostitutes, more or less.
So there was one other element to this thing that I
might mention that deals with your comment about
classified material.
I know when I was in this game first, way back years
ago,
there was an awful lot of open literature stuff
that is unclassified material that came across my
desk. But being young and impressionable, Of
course, I saw top secret stuff, too, and stuff that
was classified beyond that. And I thought that the
top secret stuff was a hell of a lot more valuable
than the open stuff. The open literature just
wasn't worth anything because it was open. Well,
that's wrong. That's an erroneous view. And of
course, the Russians now publish and disseminate
an awful lot of literature about themselves. and
so one of the things that again this was to some
extent the Erickson influence on us Erickson
works only with open literature and and he knows an
awful lot about what is going on in Russia and he
understands of course an awful lot about the
Soviets and so Another of our operational
philosophies here is that we will mine the open
literature assiduously. And yeah, we'll do
classified work, but we don't necessarily think
that the answers are all in classified documents.
And so we do, the bulk of our work to date has been
unclassified open literature searches. Could
you touch briefly on Maybe some study that's being
undergone now or has recently been completed.
Yeah, we can give you two or three examples. That'd
be sufficient, thank you. Okay. First of all,
the Pentagon has asked us here to, this was an
offshoot of the Erickson program,
set up a so-called program of excellence for the
study of Soviet military organizations and
personnel. And the first study that was
undertaken in that program was a study of Soviet
military districts. The Soviet Union is divided
up into about 16 military districts.
They are unique. organizational entities.
There's nothing else like it anyplace else in the
world. Well, I take that back. I guess the Chinese
have military districts, but they are relatively
recent developments.
However, the military districts in the Soviet
Union existed back in czarist times.
They represent
an effort on the part of the Soviet military to
bring the military right down to grassroots
control and grassroots involvement throughout
the USSR. We don't really understand how they
function, especially in wartime.
and you have to understand that the invasion of
afghanistan was not done by the soviet army it was
done by the two adjoining military districts the
turkestan military district and the central
asian military district and so they now i don't
mean to infer that they are autonomous in some
areas they are you see military training in the
soviet union starts in the second grade And the
local military districts have the
responsibility for that training program for
Soviet school children. In that sort of a
function, they are relatively autonomous. But I
surely don't mean to infer that the two commanders
of the military districts got together and said,
hey, let's invade Afghanistan. No, that's not
yet. They are linked directly to the Ministry of
Defense in Moscow, and the Ministry of Defense
calls the shots. But an awful lot of the logistics
and the rear services and supply and a fair amount
of the troop supply come from the military
districts. So it's a kind of a unique and odd
organizational entity. And so our study here was
to try to understand how those military districts
function uh what they uh what they do what they
don't do how much how much autonomy do they have and
they are disparate in their in their
organizational structure some of them are quite
complex others are fairly simple some of them will
have civil defense responsibilities some of them
do not so it's kind of an odd odd quirk so we are just
now in the final stages of actually what will turn
out to be a first part of a two-stage study of Soviet
military districts. We had thought initially it
would just be one element, which would be largely
historical.
However, the second element, which we will do next
year, will deal with what we call the military
districts in the mobilized mode, which will look
at what in fact has happened to those two military
districts adjoining Afghanistan. There had also
been some movements involving the military
districts adjoining Poland. And so perhaps from
that we can glean some information on how those
things function during wartime. And so that's one
study that
will be completed shortly. We have a series of
so-called casual papers which deal with Soviet
command structure, command changes, and the
personalities involved. The idea here is, again,
it's just a business of trying to learn how the
Soviets think. When a commander changes his...
his position, that is, when he's given a new
command or moves within the military structure.
We'll go back and get information on his
background, where he was born, where he went to
school, what kind of military schools did he go
through, if we can find it, what were his parents
like, and try to get some idea of his background and
his training.
And then we'll have a complete review of the
military posts that he has been assigned to. And
then we will, if we can find three or four papers
that he has authored over the past, say, ten years
in military journals or whatever, we'll
synopsize those papers. But when you put that all
together, it makes a fascinating package,
because here is this guy. Oh, we recently did one on
General Majorov. And
here's this guy sort of laid out before you. And so
you can see his background and his training. And
then when you look at some of his recent writings,
which are synopsized, you get some idea of what
he's thinking about and what his main concerns
are. And these generally will establish some sort
of a pattern. And so it can be fairly revealing. So
we've published, I guess, three or four studies of
that type.
Then a study that is just now being published
switches over to the US side.
There are about 10 materials. which are labeled
strategic. These are metals which are very
important to the U.S. military. Cobalt is one of
them. When you add cobalt to steel, it makes it very
hard. It also increases its magnetic properties
and increases its high temperature
characteristics, which means that it's very
useful for turbine engines and things like that.
It's also very useful in electronic components
because of its magnetic enhancement
capabilities. Currently the U.S. gets,
depending on what year you look at, anywhere from
75 to 95 percent of its cobalt from Zaire in Central
Africa, Southern Africa. And there's a whole
array of these things, tantalum, titanium, And a
lot of people think that oil is the only material
where we are at the mercy of other people. That's
wrong.
So we've done a study of
looking at what the U.S. might do in the event of a
protracted conflict with the Soviets.
There is more and more thinking now that when war
comes, that it will not be a nuclear war, that it
will be a protracted non-nuclear war. And so the
question is, the U.S. military needs cobalt in
sufficient amount to build jet engines and other
war materiel. for the duration of that
non-nuclear war. And if the Soviets could choke
off our supply from South Africa, from Southern
Africa, I should say, which they could fairly
easily do, then where in the name of God do we get the
cobalt? And so the title of the study is Cobalt,
Strategic Alternatives for Supply. And there are
four alternatives for supplying cobalt. And I
won't take time here to delineate all of that. But
what it amounts to is that there is cobalt here in
the U.S. and Canada. There had been cobalt mines
here, usually associated with copper mines. But
because of the economics of the situation, it was
cheaper to buy it from Zaire and ship it in here. And
so all of our cobalt mines have been shut down,
copper mines. So we need to reopen them. It turns
out that the country that has more cobalt than any
other country in the world is Cuba. Well, in the
event of a protracted non-nuclear conflict with
the Soviets, are we going to permit them to operate
from that base there 90 miles from our shore? One
would think not. One would hope not. I'm not
espousing an invasion of Cuba, necessarily, on
the other hand. I think to try to pretend that Cuban
cobalt does not exist is stupid. And so one of our
recommendations that came out of this report was a
suggestion that in our strategic planning that we
take into account the fact that Cuba does have
those magnificent cobalt reserves and plan
accordingly. Were these reserves being unused at
this time? Oh, yes. The Soviets are using them. You
bet. They get 40% of their cobalt from Cuba. And, of
course, using plants that were originally
American-built in pre-Castro days. And then
after Castro took over, of course, they were
nationalized in an organization called, set up
called, Cubanico. And it's an arm of the Cuban
government. And so they sell, as a matter of fact,
that's one of the main elements of the Cuban
economy, that and sugar, cobalt and sugar. And so
it... It's a situation that I think has to be looked
at realistically. I might add that in this report,
in this study that we did, we made an estimate of the
amount of cobalt that the U.S. would need. And of
course, the U.S. has been stockpiling cobalt and
has about 40 million pounds of cobalt in our
stockpile currently. Our estimates indicate
that that would be about adequate for the first
year of a conflict. Which would be all right. I
mean, that's great. That gives us a year or two to do
some other things. The question is, what are the
other things you're going to do? And so I think if we
could reopen US mines with more efficient
extraction processes, then perhaps be prepared
to use the Cuban nickel somewhere or other. And
those strategies are beyond my consideration. I
think all we can do is just simply point out that
it's there and it needs to be considered. And it's
amazing. I've previewed this report before some
people in Congress. They said, Cuba? Nickel? Why
didn't somebody tell us? And so this is, I think,
another evidence of the kind of fresh thinking
that is needed in some of these areas.
There are some other things that we'll be getting
into. Later on, we, of course, here at Texas A&M, we
are very strong in the energy field, particularly
in natural gas, crude oil production, that sort of
thing. We're also very strong in manufacturing,
and manufacturing is undergoing a revolution now
with computer-aided systems coming into the
scene. And so we will be doing some of those kinds of
studies in the Warsaw Pact and in the USSR. And then
there is one other program that will begin this
fall, which will deal with space warfare. And
there is some very clear evidence that the Soviets
are moving heavily in this direction with the
development of laser and particle beam weapons.
As a matter of fact, they are, according to the
evidence, they are probably ahead of the U.S. in
that area. So we've been asked by the US Air Force to
make a study of some aspects of the US space program
and try to give some recommendations as to what
kinds of new technologies need to be developed in
order to allow the US to fight and win a war in space.
OK, in closing, is there any other comment that
you'd like to make about anything regarding the
center your activities? Oh, I guess only this. As I
said earlier in the interview, the Center here
represents a new effort for Texas A&M. It
represents a new frontier, a new way in which Texas
A&M can serve the people of the state of Texas and
the people of the United States. I think, and of
course it's a biased view, I think Texas A&M's star
is rising. I think with all due respects to our
friends in Austin, I think Texas A&M is becoming
the premier institution in the Southwest. And so I
think the center can help contribute to that image
and to that structure. And also, I would hope the
Center can do something else. You know, there are,
of course, many influences on the federal scene,
and many of us feel that the influence of the
Northeast and the Midwest has exceeded their
importance in the general scheme of things. It
seems like when anybody is appointed to a high post
in the government, why, he comes from MIT or
Caltech or someplace. And that's not to say that we
want Texas or the Southwest to run everything,
necessarily. On the other hand, we think that
there needs to be more of a balanced voice in some of
these national decision-making processes. And
so I think there is a role here for the center to
play. Of course, here again, I'm not suggesting
that we don't have good representation in
Congress or anything like that. we do have. On the
other hand, one cannot lose people like LBJ and
Connolly and Olin Teague and Sam Rayburn and so
forth without losing a hell of a lot of clout. You
know, our young people are bright and articulate
and so forth, but they just don't have the clout
that those old boys had. And so, here again, I think
that an outfit like the Center can contribute to
that, and Texas A&M, of course, has as its first
mission the education of young people in the state
of Texas, and that must remain the first objective
for this institution. But close behind that, I
think, has to be a program to serve the people of the
state of Texas and, indeed, the people of the
United States in other ways, and in ways that a
truly intellectual institution can. And so I
think the center can aid in that. And so we have
fairly lofty goals. But you know how Aggies are.
We'll just swat the hell out of things. And it
doesn't make any difference whether this is a
lofty goal or not. We're going to give it our best
shot, and we're going to win. Thank you very much
for this most enlightening interview, Dr.
Thomas. Thank you.